---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: true
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: "Section 134 of the Doctrine and Covenants is a declaration of belief regarding governments and laws. This declaration was approved by a conference of the Church for inclusion in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. While the section has been included in every edition since and is often quoted by Church authorities, the minutes of the conference in which the declaration was read and approved for publication are clear that it was accepted as the “belief, or ‘opinion’ of the officers of the Church” and not as a revelation.[1]\_At the October, 1928 General Conference of the Church, President Heber J. Grant affirmed that Section 134 is “a declaration of the belief of our Church regarding the governments and laws, …” [2]\_Because of its long history as the most formal and officially accepted statement of LDS beliefs about government and law, it is also worth careful examination and comparison with the foundational principles articulated here."
datePublished: '2016-04-02T21:28:27.831Z'
dateModified: '2016-04-02T21:28:16.002Z'
title: 'D&C 134'
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-04-02-dandc-134.md
published: true
url: dandc-134/index.html
_type: Article

---
Section 134 of the Doctrine and Covenants is a declaration of belief regarding governments and laws. This declaration was approved by a conference of the Church for inclusion in the 1835 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants. While the section has been included in every edition since and is often quoted by Church authorities, the minutes of the conference in which the declaration was read and approved for publication are clear that it was accepted as the "belief, or 'opinion' of the officers of the Church" and not as a revelation.\[1\] At the October, 1928 General Conference of the Church, President Heber J. Grant affirmed that Section 134 is "a declaration of the belief of our Church regarding the governments and laws, ..." \[2\] Because of its long history as the most formal and officially accepted statement of LDS beliefs about government and law, it is also worth careful examination and comparison with the foundational principles articulated here.

The declaration begins by simply stating the belief that "governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man; and that he holds men accountable for their acts in relation to them, both in making laws and administering them, for the good and safety of society." (D&C 134:1) Latter-day Saints believe there is individual accountability for the collective actions taken by their government\[3\] as well as specific benefits that flow from well-run governments. This accountability is inescapable and extends both to "making laws and administering them." Thus, active engagement in the functioning of government is inherent in citizenship.

In order to promote the "good and safety of society," the declaration states that policies and laws should be adopted and implemented that promote the public interest and protect the individual's free exercise of conscience.

> ... all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are best calculated to secure the public interest; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience. (D&C 134:5)

The declaration also makes clear a commitment to the rule of law and to quality administration in government.

> We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same; and that such as will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people if a republic, or the will of the sovereign.   
> 
> We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside, while protected in their inherent and inalienable rights by the laws of such governments;   
> 
> ... that to the laws all men owe respect and deference, as without them peace and harmony would be supplanted by anarchy and terror; human laws being instituted for the express purpose of regulating our interests as individuals and nations, between man and man; (D&C 134: 3, 5, 6)

The declaration goes further and declares that "...for the public peace and tranquility all men should step forward and use their ability in bringing offenders against good laws to punishment," (D&C 134:8) a view that is quite consistent with the principle of accountability as citizens.

The declaration identifies three "inherent and inalienable" rights which governments should secure to each individual through the legal system:

> We believe that no government can exist in peace, except such laws are framed and held inviolate as will secure to each individual the free exercise of conscience, the right and control of property, and the protection of life. (D&C 134:2)

Thus while the need for governments to curtail individual freedoms is acknowledged in the need to pass and enforce laws "for the good and safety of society," there is a minimum set of rights necessary for individuals to be able to exercise their individual agency. That set of rights is summarized in the declaration as in other non-church documents before\[4\] and after the declaration as the protection of life, liberty (free exercise of conscience) and property. The exploration, explication and defense of these rights have occupied volumes, and it is not our objective to review this vast literature here. But it is worthwhile to consider each in light of the foundational principles identified here.

## _Free Exercise of Conscience_

The declaration of belief contained in section 134 is absolutely clear that men and women are amenable only to God for the exercise of their religion unless their actions infringe on the rights and liberties of others. The law and those who administer it should "never control conscience" nor "suppress the freedom of the soul." The Constitution also affirms the free exercise of religion.

But both documents go beyond the individualized practice of personal religion. Section 134 affirms that it is "just to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth, and warn the righteous to save themselves from the corruption of the world." (D&C 134:12) Consistent with the right to attempt to influence others in religious matters, and with accountability for the quality of governance overall, the Constitution affirms positive rights of free speech, free press, freedom of assembly and of suffrage. Thus, the minimum standard established in these two documents includes both the right to freely exercise one's personal religion (subject to a similar right for others), and the right to meet, discuss and attempt to influence other members of the community. While section 134 is particularly concerned with religion, clearly the Constitution encompasses a similar right for all efforts to influence other members of society and the government itself. Freedom of conscience then includes both individual and collective agency at least to the extent of free expression and dialogue, and personal practices that do not compel others or infringe on their rights.

Beyond this minimum, if supported by the popular will, citizens may choose to act through their government to cooperate and facilitate the development of individuals and groups within the population by providing for such things as:

* Basic and/or advanced education for all or part of the population
* Legal requirements which assure equal opportunity for all
* Physical infrastructure such as roads, waterways, etc., to promote the public interest
* A market infrastructure including a common currency, public enforcement of private contracts, etc.

The only limiting factor on such exercises of collective agency is that all individuals retain certain property rights as discussed in the next section.

## _Right and Control of Property_

It is possible to conceive of a society in which all social needs are met by voluntary contributions. However, until such a society voluntarily comes into existence, societies must grapple with the difficult question of how the line should be drawn between voluntary actions and government compulsion. Is it permissible to curtail the freedom of one group (through taxes or restrictions on property rights) in order to expand the freedoms of another group (e.g., better education, health care or access to land)? As noted earlier, the answer to these questions is yes, within limits, if approved by the voice of the people. Access to land may be the key case study.

It may appear that in an industrial society people do not require access to land in order to support themselves. But families need a minimal amount of space in order to live (even if the land area is shared with others by stacking the dwelling units) and work. People also need access to roads and walkways in order to move about and carry out life's activities. And ultimately land is required to grow crops and the food necessary to feed people and produce materials that are converted into clothing, shelter, etc.

In the 1830s, the term property was used to describe both material things belonging to a person or group as well as land under one ownership (_Oxford English Dictionary_). Thus, in reading section 134, it cannot be assumed that the term property applies only to land. At the same time, the right to property does not necessarily imply the right to fee-simple ownership of property. The key right concept may well be the right to access, control and benefit from the materials and land necessary to provide for living space and familial support.

From one perspective, private ownership of tangible property is inconsistent with scriptures that declare that the "earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof." (I Cor 10:26; Psalms 24:1; Deuteronomy 10:14). If the earth belongs to God as its creator, then our possession of it is as stewards.

> For it is expedient that I, the Lord, should make every man accountable, as a steward over earthly blessings, which I have made and prepared for my creatures. I, the Lord, stretched out the heavens, and built the earth, my very handiwork; and all things therein are mine. (D&C 104:13-14)

> ... \[F\]or it is required of the Lord, at the hand of every steward, to render an account of his stewardship, both in time and in eternity. For he who is faithful and wise in time is accounted worthy to inherit the mansions prepared for him of my Father. (D&C 72:3-4)

Similarly, scriptures in which God grants possession of certain lands to particular groups as a "land of inheritance" do not appear to contemplate the sale of that land to others. Under the regulations contained in the Torah, for example, in the Jubilee year the Israelite nation was to return all property to its original owner (except the houses of laymen within walled cities). (Leviticus 25)

The Constitution seems to make clear that a family's possessions should be safe from unwarranted or unlawful seizure by the government. It seems reasonable to presume that the society would protect an individual's security of possession from similar seizure by private individuals or entities. Beyond this level of security, a minimal standard in this domain would require that all persons have access to adequate living space for themselves and their family. This requirement does not necessarily imply private ownership, but simply security of tenure. Families also require access to the tangible property necessary for personal and family support in order to be self-reliant, and they should have free access to public right-of-ways. These minimal rights related to property ensure to each individual the capacity to act on the choices made and receipt of the product or result of those choices.

In this domain as well as in the free exercise of conscience, societies may choose to articulate property rights beyond the minimum level just described. Property rights are commonly considered a group of rights, often described as similar to a bundle of sticks. Which specific rights are included in the bundle varies sharply across cultures and over time within the same culture. Again the precise adaptation of the "right and control of property" will depend on the voice of the people at a given time and place.

## _Protection of Life_

At one level, the protection of life may seem the most straightforward of the three rights. It seems clear that individuals and families should be safe from violence either from the government or from others in the community. Murder, assault, all forms of abuse and other acts of violence should be prohibited and physical safety should be vigorously protected.

But it could well be argued that ignoring the nutritional needs of a starving individual is hardly protecting their life. Here again, though, the voice of the people may respond differently in different settings. It would certainly be conceivable that a society could choose to act collectively through government to establish safety nets to assure such things as adequate food, shelter and/or healthcare. Other societies may elect to meet these basic needs through the voluntary sector and the generosity of private individuals, depending on the will of the people. In all societies, voluntary associations of private individuals can provide a valuable expression of and extension to individual agency.

### References

\[1\] Smith, Hyrum M. and Janne M. Sjodahl, 1972,_Introduction to and commentary on The Doctrine and Covenants_, Rev. Ed., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., pg. 852\.

\[2\] LDS, Conference Report, 5 Oct 1928, pp 9, 11\.

\[3\] Which "men" are held accountable may seem somewhat ambiguous. By one possible reading, the passage applies only to the government officials who make and administer laws. However this does not seem compatible with "government of the people, by the people and for the people" which has been the most common view at least since Lincoln used the phrase.

\[4\] See the Declaration of Independence and the natural law writers, especially John Locke. Of course, Jefferson replaced the word "property" with "pursuit of happiness" in the Declaration of Independence.